# 	Controlling the Chaos: A data-informed, automated Quality-Assurance and Quality-Control Process for Continuous, Hydrological Data.

M. W. McGauley, B. E. Jacko, S. Estes, V. B. Smith, B. M. Wadzuk
Villanova Center for Resilient Water Systems, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Villanova University, 800 Lancaster Ave, Villanova, PA 19085.

Abstract:
While more hydrological data is being generated than ever before, the power of this collected information is not fully realized unless it is of high quality. This is especially pertinent when considering hydrological data from sensor networks, which is often errant due to the possibility of malfunction or non-conducive environmental conditions. These fluctuations or errors are difficult to predict, identify, and interpret.  This is an issue that is expected to fluctuate over time due to seasonal and annual changes in a given watershed. Further, identifying sensor malfunction is an issue that is rapidly amplified as datasets grow. Manual processes of quality assurance are not designed for managing datasets with continuous timeseries, resulting in processes that are time consuming and rely on humanmade decision making, which lacks statistical inference in the alteration of arbitrary data points. This research hypothesizes that the stochasticity of rainfall and deterministic properties of flow data can be used in concert to create a more characteristic quality assurance method, by which one can supplement data anomalies and impute missing values in sensor-derived datasets.  Further, an automated, data-informed, and efficient process by which to achieve this goal is presented for use in instances of large hydrologic datasets. The application of the process presented here can improve the quality of long-term hydrologic datasets while maintaining statistical integrity and circumventing biases and instances of user error.
